# Takeover

The takeover directory holds the logic for the Takeover Client (the new EdenFS
process) and Server (the old EdenFS process) which are used during a graceful
restart process.

Takeover is currently supported for NFS and FUSE mounts. Takeover does not
support PrjFS mounts.

## Structure

There are 5 main components in the takeover directory: thrift serialization
library, client, server, data, and handler.

### Thrift serialization library

There are three main message classes that are exchanged over the takeover
socket:

- `struct TakeoverVersionQuery` - This is sent from the client to the server to
  inform the server what features of the takeover protocol the client supports.
  This allows us to evolve the protocol. This struct contains two fields:
  `versions` and `capabilities`. _ `versions` is a legacy field. We use to use
  to distinguish versions of the takeover protocol by number. This list of
  versions is suppose to contain all the numbered versions of the protocol that
  the client supports. These days we expect the versions list to be a singleton
  list containing the last version number (7). _ `capabilities` These days we
  have migrated the protocol to be capability based instead of version based.
  Instead of telling the server which versions the client supports, the client
  tells the server directly which features or capabilities of the takeover
  protocol the client supports. These capabilities are represented as a bit
  mask. Each bit represents a certain capability. You can see the different
  capabilities in `TakeoverData.h`. Some capabilities are required these days
  since we have deprecated old versions of the protocol and some capabilities
  have dependencies. See `TakeoverData::computeCompatibleCapabilities` and the
  comments in `TakeoverData.h`.
- empty "ready" ping - An empty ping sent by the server to ensure the client is
  still alive and ready to receive takeover data
- `union SerializedTakeoverData` - This is a legacy union. Modern versions of
  the protocol instead use `SerializedTakeoverResult` instead. This is a union
  of a list of `SerializedMountInfo` or a string error. \*
  `struct SerializedMountInfo` - see info in the lower section.
- `union SerializedTakeoverResult`. This is either a `SerializedTakeoverInfo` or
  a string error. We migrated from `SerializedTakeoverData` to this so that we
  can pass general (non mount point specific) data in the non error case. _
  `struct SerializedTakeoverInfo` - This is the struct representing all the data
  we send for takeover in the non error case. This contains two fields: `mounts`
  and `fileDescriptors`. `mounts` is a list of `SerializedMountInfo` and
  `fileDescriptors` is a list of `FileDescriptorType`. _
  `struct SerializedMountInfo` - Contains the mount path, the type of mount in
  use, a state directory, a list of bind mount paths (which is no longer used),
  connection information, and a `SerializedInodeMap` _
  `struct SerializedInodeMap` - A list of `SerializedInodeMapEntry` unloaded
  inodes _ `struct SerializedInodeMapEntry` - contains inode information like
  inodeNumber, parentInode, name, isUnlinked, numFuseReferences, hash, and mode.
  _ `struct SerializedFileHandleMap` - currently empty _
  `union FileDescriptorType` this is an enum of all the types of file
  descriptors we can send during takeover (excluding mount specific fds). The
  list of these represents the order the non mount specific file descriptors are
  sent in the underlying sendmsg call. Mount point file descriptors are sent in
  the same order as the list of SerializedMountInfo for the mount points.

### Client

The client has one function - `takeoverMounts`. This function requests to take
over mount points from an existing edenfs process. On success, it returns a
`TakeoverData` object, and it throws an exception on error. It takes four
parameters: a socketPath, a bool shouldPing, and a set of integers of supported
takeover versions (legacy), and a bit mask of the supported takeover versions.
The last three parameters are for testing purposes and should not be used in
productions builds.

This has a takeover timeout of 5 minutes for receiving takeover data from old
process.

We connect to the socket at the given path, then send our send our protocol
capabilities so that the server knows whether we're capable of handshaking
successfully. We then wait for the server to send us a "ready" ping, making sure
we are still listening on the socket. We respond to this ping and then wait for
the takeover data response. It is possible that we will not receive this ping,
and instead just receive the takeover data response.

After we get the takeover data response, we either throw an exception if we do
not get a message, or we deserialize the message and check its contents. We
throw an exception if the number of sockets sent is not the expected size (num
of mount points + 2 for the lock file and the thrift socket + 1 optional socket
for mountd). Otherwise, if all is well, we save the lock file, thrift socket,
mountd socket and all the mount points.

### Server

A helper class that listens on a unix domain socket for clients that wish to
perform graceful takeover of this `EdenServer`'s mount points. This class uses
the `EdenServer`'s main `EventBase` for driving its I/O.

It has a few functions:

- public function:
  - start - This is called when the EdenFS daemon first starts. It begins
    listening on the takeover socket, waiting for a client to connect and
    request to initiate a graceful restart. When a client connects, it verifies
    that the client process is from the same user ID, and that the client and
    server support a compatible takeover protocol capabilities. If the
    capabilities are compatible, then the server starts to initiate shutdown by
    calling `server_->getTakeoverHandler()->startTakeoverShutdown()`. After the
    shutdown is completed, the takeover server pings the takeover client to
    ensure it is still waiting for the data. If the ping is unsuccessful
    (timeout, error, etc), the takeover server stops the takeover process and
    returns the untransmitted `TakeoverData` in an exception in order to let the
    `EdenServer` recover itself and start serving again. Finally, it closes its
    storage (local and backing stores) and sends the takeover data over the
    takeover socket by serializing the information (version, lock file, thrift
    socket, mount file descriptor) or error, and sending it.
- private functions:
  - `connectionAccepted` - callback function for allocating a connection handler
    when the server gets a client.
  - `acceptError` - callback function that simply logs on an accept() error on
    the takeover socket
  - `connectionDone` - callback function that is declared in the .h file but
    currently is not defined.

### Data

This holds the set of capabilities supported by this build. It also holds the
lock file, the server socket, mountd, expected order to serialize those file
descriptors, the mount points, and a takeover complete promise that will be
fulfilled by the `TakeoverServer` code once the `TakeoverData` has been sent to
the remote process. It has a function to serialize and deserialize the
`TakeoverData`.

### Handler

TakeoverHandler is a pure virtual interface for classes that want to implement
graceful takeover functionality. This is primarily implemented by the
`EdenServer` class. However, there are also alternative implementations used for
unit testing.

It has two pure virtual functions: `startTakeoverShutdown()` and
`closeStorage()`.

`startTakeoverShutdown()` will be called when a graceful shutdown has been
requested, with a remote process attempting to take over the currently running
mount points.

When implemented, this should return a Future that will produce the
`TakeoverData` to send to the remote edenfs process once the edenfs process is
ready to transfer its mounts.

`closeStorage()` will be called before sending the `TakeoverData` to the client,
conditionally on a successful ready handshake (if applicable). This function
should close storage used by the server. In the case of an `EdenServer`, this
function allows for locks to be released in order for the new process to take
over this storage.
